
<!-- README.md is generated from README.Rmd. Please edit that file -->

[![DOI](https://zenodo.org/badge/231636929.svg)](https://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10648280)

# Llgaay gwii sdiihlda – Restoring Balance project.

The title is in the Skidegate dialect of Xaayda /Haida for Restoring
Balance.

## Project Description

The Llgaay gwii sdiihlda project was a Parks Canada Agency funded
project (2014-2020) that attempted to restored the balance in the
coastal forest ecosystem on six islands of the Haida Gwaii archipelago
within the National Park Reserve, National Marine Conservation Area
Reseve and Haida Heritage site known as Gwaii Haanas. The project goal
was to eradicate all invasive Sitka black-tailed deer from six islands
where their persistent browsing had greatly diminished the understory
and young trees in the forest and negatively impacted biodiversity. The
code in this repository used data from that project to determine the
efficacy of the different eradication methods used during the project.
It also looks at the cost through time of the different methods and
estimates the likely number of deer remaining on the islands at the time
of the project’s cancellation (while it was still incomplete).

### Installing and Running the Project

In order to install and run the code, you will need to open the
zzz-run-all.r file which has the order to go for running the code. The
csv files with the final data from the project will be accessed through
the open data portal of the Government of Canada. The first call is to
run `install-packages.R` which will install all dependencies beyond base
R.

### Collaborators

This project had many collaborators both operationally in the field and
for the analysis. The paper for which this analysis was done has a full
list of acknowledgements. For this analysis, the main programmer was
Dr. Joe Thorley with database programming assistance from Seb Dalgarno,
both of Poisson Consulting Ltd.  The data cleaning and tidying was done
by Patrick Bartier, Charlotte Houston, Robyn Irvine and Christine
Bentley of Parks Canada.

### Licensing

This work is under the MIT license. Copyright (c) 2024 Joe Thorley,
Poisson Consulting Ltd.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
“Software”), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software. THE SOFTWARE IS
PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE
AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER
LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING
FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER
DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
